# Preface
What we now know as the Nihon Kendō Kata got their current name with the establishment of the All-Japan Kendo Federation (全日本剣道連盟 *zen-nihon kendō renmei*, ZNKR) in 1952[^1]. Before that, in keeping with the ultra-nationalistic spirit of the prewar times, they were called the Dai-Nippon Teikoku Kendō Kata (大日本帝国剣道形), or "the Greater-Japanese Empire Kendō Kata". The set of ten forms were announced by the Dai-Nippon Butokukai (大日本武徳会) in October 1912, after a fierce, year-long debate by the kendō kata creation committee, consisting of top swordsmen from many different kenjutsu schools. The committee had been formed on request by the Ministry of Education and Culture (文部省 *Monbushō*) with the background of kendō (together with jūdō) having been included in the core curriculum for junior high-school students in July 1911.

A less well-known part of the history of kendō kata is that the Butokukai only created seven new kata in 1912. The first three kata had been created already a year before, at a seminar hosted by the Monbushō in November 1911 for the purpose of unifying kendō education. In other words, although we are used to thinking of kendō kata as the "seven tachi and three kodachi kata", they can and should be divided also in another way: "the three Monbushō tachi kata, and the Butokukai's four tachi and three kodachi kata".

As can be expected, the kata formulated by the Ministry of Education and Culture for the express purpose of teaching junior high-school students have a very different approach to pedagogy compared to the kata produced by the committee of koryū representatives, and must be understood in this light.

## Sword technique kata and sword principle kata

Not all kata (primarily) teach useful techniques. As often, they are about important principles of sword fighting, where the specific techniques used to demonstrate these principles are secondary; a necessary tool for conveying something more fundamental. Indeed, most koryū are arranged in sets of kata where the first set teaches basic techniques and principles, intermediate sets dealing with more specific or difficult applications of said techniques and principles, until the student reaches the inner or secret teachings, which, to an outsider, often seem abstract, difficult to understand, and sometimes even outright strange -- yet often short and simple. Why would that be? The answer is that the inner teachings usually are meant to impart the founding principles of the school in a distilled form. Techniques, after all, are only tools for applying fighting principles in order to win.

Sasaki-sensei[^2] makes the distinction between sword technique (剣術 *kenjutsu*) and sword principle (剣理 *kenri*) kata. The first three kendō kata, designed by the Monbushō to impart in young students the basics of the sword, are primarily sword principle kata, while the seven Butokukai kata primarily teach techniques -- although there is more than an element of both technique and principle in both sets.

## The sword and moral truths
There is another, oft-overlooked, aspect to the three Monbushō kata that puts them in a different light once known: created, as they were, by the Ministry of Education and Culture as a part of a junior high-school curriculum, they were meant also to instil certain moral values in students. Echoes of this thinking can still be seen today in the [core principles of kendō](https://www.kendo.or.jp/en/knowledge/kendo-concept/), but the education system of early-20th-century Japan placed a much greater emphasis on love for and loyalty to the country and the Emperor, and assigned great value to the idea of what it meant to be a good Japanese citizen. It was in this mould that the country sought to shape its youth, in particular the relative few privileged enough to enter junior high school at the time. Although the times have fortunately changed since then, and we would do well to reflect on what the spirit of those times eventually led to, I believe there are still transcendental moral lessons to be learnt from the practice of kendō kata.


[^1]: The explanations of the forms were revised and expanded in 1917, and again in 1933. Finally, in 1981, the manual was rewritten using modern language to make it more accessible.

[^2]: See the [top page](README.md).
