# On the Butokukai kata

When the Butokukai's kendō kata creation committee first gathered in 1911, they set about the task of creating a set of kata for junior high-school kendō education using the existing [Butokukai seitei kenjutsu kata](../butokukai/README.md) as the base. The Butokukai kenjutsu kata had failed to reach widespread acceptance in large part due to the kata being too strongly influenced by a single ryūha (Shintō Munen-ryū). For this reason, the new committee wanted the new kata to capture the essence of kendō in a way that exponents of all schools could agree on, rather than representing one or a few ryūha. This would prove to be a more difficult task than anyone could have expected. At one point, Takano Sasaburō, known as the father of modern kendō, in sheer frustration over not having his opinions heard, brought a concealed tantō to the committee meeting "fully prepared to die". Ironically, his own Tōkyō Kōshi Gogyō no Kata ended up having the largest influence on the finished forms.

The original Gogyō no Kata (五行之形) were created by the fourth head of the Nakanishi-ha Ittō-ryū, Nakanishi Tanemasa, towards the end of the Edo period. When Takano Sasaburō, who belonged to Nakanishi-ha Ittō-ryū, was invited by Kanō Jigorō (the creator of jūdō) to teach gekken (kendō) at the Tōkyō higher normal school (東京高等師範学校, *Tōkyō Kōtō Shihan Gakkō*; abbr. 東京高師, *Tōkyō Kōshi*), he adapted the Gōgyō no Kata for educational purposes, thus creating the Tōkyō Kōshi Gogyō no Kata (東京高師五行之). The Tōkyō higher normal school went on to become Tsukuba university, where the Tōkyō Kōshi Gogyō no Kata are passed on to this day.
