# Tachi gohonme　太刀五本目

Uchidachi assumes morote-hidari-jōdan, and shidachi chūdan. Both sides advance into ma-ai, and uchidachi, sensing an opportunity, steps forwards with the right foot to cut shidachi's shōmen.

Shidachi, stepping backwards leading with the left foot, performs *suriage* with the left (omote) shinogi, and steps forwards again leading with the right foot to cut uchidachi's shōmen. While stepping back with the right foot, shidachi raises their sword into hidari-jōdan to display zanshin.

When uchidachi begins to raise their kensen into chūdan, shidachi steps back with the left foot and lowers their own kensen to meet in ai-chūdan. Uchidachi starting with the left foot and shidachi with the right, both sides take three small steps to return to the centre, then lower their kensen and return to their respective starting location.

## Overview

This kata was developed from [the first form](../butokukai/daiippon.md) of the Butokukai kenjutsu kata, although there is not much left of the original today. Uchidachi's attack was changed from a diagonal cut to the upper arm to a vertical cut to the head because the upper arm is not a valid target in modern kendō, and because of this, their sword is not in a position for shidachi to perform uchiotoshi and follow up with a tsuki. Instead, shidachi directly makes a decisive shōmen cut, and steps back into jōdan to show zanshin. In the Dai-Nippon Teikoku Kendō Kata, shidachi's tate-jōdan was kept from the original Butokukai kenjutsu kata, as can be seen in [this enbu](https://youtu.be/R2ZRpl9WoPQ) by Takano Sasaburō-hanshi and Nakayama Hakudō-hanshi.

## Kamae

In response to uchidachi's hidari-jōdan, shidachi raises their kensen towards uchidachi's left fist. There has been some debate about what exactly this "anti-jōdan chūdan" should look like, and the committee responsible for updating the manual to modern Japanese in 1981 was split between two opinions: that the edge should be pointing straight down, and that it should be angled somewhat to the left. The latter version is consistent with *hira-seigan* from Ittō-ryū, from where this kamae was taken. In the end, the former faction appears to have scored at least a partial victory, for the final wording was amended to "the edge facinh down" (刃先は下を向く) with the specification "straight" dropped (真下→下). Perfectly clear. The fact that they decided to relax the wording should probably be taken to mean that the edge does not have to be facing straight down, but in any event must not be angled significantly to the left like in hira-seigan. Since the kensen is raised and moved slightly to the right to threaten uchidachi's left hand, the palm of the right hand will naturally turn ever so slightly upwards, wherefore it is actually a bit awkward to keep the edge pointing completely straight downwards. At the same time, shidachi must not make any conscious effort to angle the blade, so this small natural opening-up of the palm should be considered the acceptable limit.
